   Interim Report: Integration of Mixed Reality in
Educational Escape Room for Self-Directed Learning in
              Object-Oriented Programming


                              Shaoteng KE
                             20320287
                     scysk1@nottingham.edu.cn

               Supervised by: Dr. Boon Giin LEE




                       Submitted on 19 December 2024

      School of Computer Science University of Nottingham, Ningbo China
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                1
  1.1 Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       1
  1.2 Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2

2 Related Work                                                                                2
  2.1 Education Escape Rooms (EERs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         2
  2.2 MR in Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2

3 Methodologies                                                                               3
  3.1 Game Design Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
      3.1.1 Game Design Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        4
      3.1.2 Level 1: Assemble Your Partner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        4
      3.1.3 Level 2: Search the TF Card . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
      3.1.4 Level 3: The Maze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6
  3.2 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
      3.2.1 MR Interaction Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
      3.2.2 Spatial Anchoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
      3.2.3 Hands Gesture Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7

4 Project Management                                                                          8

5 Reflection                                                                                  9

A Appendices                                                                                 12
  A.1 Project Design Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      12




                                               i
1     Introduction
1.1    Background and Motivation
Self-directed learning has been widely recognized for its essential role in fostering students’
critical thinking, problem-solving abilities, and intrinsic motivation, particularly in complex
and abstract fields like computer science (CS). As one of the most high-potential disciplines,
CS education has significantly benefited from integrating advanced educational technologies,
such as large language models (LLMs) and gamification. However, a significant gap remains
in promoting self-directed learning for certain challenging concepts in CS, especially in object-
oriented programming (OOP), where abstract concepts can be difficult for students to grasp
independently.
    Given these challenges, educational escape rooms (EERs) have emerged as an promising
approach to active learning and breakout traditional classroom, blending problem-solving tasks
with narratives to create immersive learning experiences [1]. EERs have been applied in many
academic disciplines, including computer science [2], physics [3], mathematics [4–8], biology [9],
and chemistry [10]. Furthermore, as EERs are based on a game structure and design, they are
linked to the methodology of gamification [1]. Students engage in subject-specific challenges
within a structured, game-based environment. By requiring students to solve a series of puzzles
to “escape”, EERs foster critical thinking and the application of knowledge in a stimulating,
time-bound setting. However, traditional physical EERs’ are resource-intensive, restricted by
classroom availability, budget, and a lack of time for preparation [11].
    To address these limitations, several researches turned to digital educational escape rooms
(DEERs) to provide greater flexibility and immersion [12]: Baziak et al. developed a mathe-
matical DEER integrating Cave Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE) technology [4]; Tsa-
lidis et al. created Earscape, an auditory DEER using immersive virtual reality (IVR) [13];
Guillen-Sanz et al. developed an IVR escape room for teaching physiological regulation [14].
However, despite the growing interest in DEERs, few studies have explored the integration
of head-mounted display (HMD) mixed reality (MR) technology, which offers unique advan-
tages by seamlessly blending physical and virtual environments, allowing users to interact with
digital objects within their physical surroundings [15].
    While the fusion of real and virtual elements has been proven to provide a more intuitive
and immersive experience, enabling learners to connect abstract concepts with tangible inter-
actions [15], there is limited exploration of MR-enhanced EERs in CS education. Therefore,
it’s worth investigating the integration of MR to the development of EERs focused on CS
education, especially in OOP concepts.




                                                1
1.2    Aims and Objectives
The project aims to integrate MR technology into the development of a programming EER
game, specifically focusing on enhancing self-directed learning in OOP. By combining the
immersive aspects of MR with the interactive nature of EERs, the project seeks to provide an
innovative and engaging platform for students to grasp complex programming concepts, with
the addressing the following research questions as objectives:

    • RQ1: How does immersive MR EER gameplay influence students’ learning motivation,
      engagement, and learning outcomes within the context of OOP self-directed learning?

    • RQ2: How does the integration of physical and virtual elements in the MR environment
      influence students’ problem-solving and critical thinking?


2     Related Work
2.1    Education Escape Rooms (EERs)
Escape rooms have considerable use in educational settings due to their potential to enhance
learning experiences. Fotatris and Mastoras [11] conducted a systematic review based on 68
peer-reviewed studies exploring the impact of EERs on education. They concluded that EERs
are able to provide students with an engaging learning experience, fostering the development
of critical cognitive skills such as creativity, decision-making, and critical thinking. Quek et
al. [16] reviewed 52 studies focusing on the use of EERs in the healthcare field. Their findings
revealed that EERs are enjoyable for students and can contribute to increased motivation for
learning. They also identified DEERs as a promising and emerging approach in educational
settings. For more specific educational contexts, López-Pernas et al. [2] examined the use of
EER in higher education programming courses. They concluded that EERs can significantly
enhance student engagement and learning outcomes, with students showing a stronger prefer-
ence for EERs compared to traditional teaching methods and materials. Morrell and Ball [17]
explored the application of two different versions of EERs in undergraduate nursing education,
revealing that EERs encouraged students to reflect on their successes and challenges more ef-
fectively. The students involved in the experiment exhibited higher levels of engagement and
competitiveness, further highlighting the potential of EERs to foster active participation in
learning. Their research highlighted the potential of EERs to create interactive and effective
learning environments across different fields of study.


2.2    MR in Education
Speicher et al. concluded [18] that MR is an interactive technology that merges virtual and
physical elements in real time, enabling learners to engage with both environments and creating

                                               2
immersive and hands-on learning experiences. MR has been increasingly utilized in education
to enhance learning outcomes through its hands-on, experiential approach. Pellas et al. [19]
reviewed 42 studies on MR applications in K-12 education, finding that MR can significantly
improve student engagement, participation, skill acquisition, and knowledge transfer within
well-structured instructional designs. Similarly, Banjar et al. [20] conducted a systematic re-
view of 12 studies in higher education, concluding that MR is beneficial, feasible, and effective,
enhancing learning environments, increasing student motivation, and improving performance.
However, a gap remains in understanding how the integration of physical and virtual elements
in MR environments influences students’ problem-solving and critical thinking, particularly in
complex subjects like OOP.
    Despite the valuable insights provided by existing studies, there is a notable gap in research
exploring the integration of MR and EERs in programming education. To address this gap,
this project focuses on designing strategies that combine MR with an EER game for teaching
OOP. It aims to reduce the difficulty of learning complex programming concepts and explore
how immersive EER gameplay and MR visualization influence problem-solving and critical
thinking during the learning process. The goal is to use MR interaction and animation to
visualize OOP concepts, thereby enhancing the learning motivation and outcomes for beginner
programmers.


3     Methodologies
3.1    Game Design Framework
The Game Design Document (GDD) serves as a comprehensive blueprint for game develop-
ment projects, outlining the game’s structure and design framework [21]. It plays a vital role
in defining the scope, establishing the game’s overall direction, and ensuring consistency across
the development process. For this AVP MR project, implemented using the Unity3D engine,
the Unity Project Design Document (PDD) serves as the primary GDD. The document is or-
ganized with six key components: player control, basic gameplay, sound and effects, gameplay
mechanics, user interface, and other features. The PDD template can be found in Appendix
A.1.
    In this section, the design framework includes a clear overview of the game, followed by de-
tailed descriptions of three levels within the game. These level descriptions are systematically
supported by the six components outlined in the PDD, which ensures clarity, consistency, and
effective guidance throughout the project’s implementation.




                                                3
3.1.1   Game Design Overview

In this MR Escape Room game, players are required to learn different OOP concepts and prac-
tice hands-on programming skills to solve puzzles and escape the room. In level 1, the player’s
task is to collect the body components of a small robot companion scattered throughout the
room. Using a drag-and-drop graphical interface for OOP programming at a workbench, the
player assembles the robot successfully.
    After assembling the robot, level 2’s objective is to activate it by finding the robot’s TF
card hidden within the room. The player must program a Detector and use the programmed
Detector to search for the TF card in the physical room.
    Once the robot is activated, a small maze rises from the tabletop. At level 3, the player
must apply more advanced OOP concepts to program the robot’s automated movements. The
goal is to guide the robot through the maze, overcoming various obstacles, and ultimately
reaching the maze’s end to obtain the key needed for both the robot and the player to escape
the room.
    The game design overview is summarized in Table 1.

                Table 1: Overview of game design for learning OOP concepts

 Type        Description                                            OOP Concepts
 Level 1     The player will gather the robot’s body components     Class; Object; Methods;
             and assemble them on the workbench by solving          Attributes
             coding puzzles
 Level 2     The player will program a detector and utilize it to   Constructors;    Parame-
             search the room for the TF chip, which is needed to    ters
             activate the robot
 Level 3     The player will develop the robot’s movement logic     Inheritance; Abstraction;
             to navigate through the maze, overcome obstacles,      Encapsulation; Polymor-
             and retrieve the key required for their escape         phism



3.1.2   Level 1: Assemble Your Partner

The PDD for the Level 1: “Assemble Your Partner” is outlined as follows:

  1. Player Control : The player takes the role of themselves in this “Assemble Your Partner”
     level, where the player is free to explore in the MR environment. Using intuitive drag-
     and-drop gestures, players solve coding tasks to assemble the robot’s body
     components.

  2. Basic Gameplay: During the game, robot body parts appear scattered throughout
     the room, and the goal of the game is to collect these components and assem-

                                              4
        ble the robot on the workbench by solving coding puzzles on a drag-and-drop
        interface.

  3. Sound and Effects: There will be sound effects when the player picks up, drops, or
     successfully assembles a robot part, and animation of the robot assembling with
     particle effects when code blocks are placed correctly into position. There will
     also be an animation of unsuccessful assembling when the player puts the code
     blocks in the wrong way.

  4. Gameplay Mechanism: As the game progresses, the player must learn and use beginner-
     level OOP concepts, including Class, Object, Methods, and Attributes, to
     solve the coding task.

  5. User Interface: The drag-and-drop coding interface will appear above the work-
     bench whenever the player places robot components floating on it. At the start
     of the game, the title “Assemble Your Partner” will appear, and the game will end when
     all robot parts are correctly assembled.

  6. Other Features: There will be a narrative introduction from the broken small
     robot in a weak voice explaining its importance in progressing through the escape
     room. Hints will be available for players who struggle with either finding components
     or solving coding puzzles.

3.1.3    Level 2: Search the TF Card

The PDD for the Level 2: “Search the TF Card” is outlined as follows:

  1. Player Control : The player takes the role of themselves in this “Search the TF Card”
     level, where the player is free to explore in the MR environment, program a detector
     to search for and locate the TF card within the room.

  2. Basic Gameplay: During the game, the TF card of the robot is hidden somewhere
     in the room, and the goal of the game is to program and use a functional Detector
     to find the TF card and activate the robot.

  3. Sound and Effects: There will be sound effects when the player successfully pro-
     grams the Detector and when the TF card is found, and particle effects and
     beeps indicate hotspots or the card’s location when the Detector is active.

  4. Gameplay Mechanism: As the game progresses, the player must adjust and refine
     the detector’s programming logic by learning and using middle-level OOP
     concepts, including Constructors and their parameters.


                                            5
  5. User Interface: The drag-and-drop coding interface will appear above the work-
     bench whenever the player places the detector or the robot floating on it. At
     the start of the level, the title “Search the TF Card” will appear, and the game will end
     when the robot is activated.

  6. Other Features: The robot will provide guidance or hints if the player struggles to
     program the detector or locate the TF card.

3.1.4   Level 3: The Maze

The PDD for the Level 3: “The Maze” is outlined as follows:

  1. Player Control : The player takes the role of themselves in this “The Maze” level, where
     they can freely explore the MR environment. The player programs the robot’s move-
     ment logic, integrating new functional components, to guide it through a maze
     to progress.

  2. Basic Gameplay: During the game, a small maze will rise from the tabletop, and
     the goal of the game is to program the robot to overcome obstacles and reach
     the end of the maze to obtain the escape key.

  3. Sound and Effects: There will be animation when the robot is armed with new
     functional components. There will also be sound effects when the robot success-
     fully navigates obstacles or reaches checkpoints in the maze, and particle effects
     highlight the robot’s path or obstacles encountered.

  4. Gameplay Mechanism: As the game progresses, the player must apply advanced
     OOP concepts to program the robot’s movement logic and arm the robot, including
     Abstraction, Encapsulation, inheritance, and Polymorphism, making it capable
     of navigating the maze and avoiding obstacles.

  5. User Interface: The robot programming interface will appear above the work-
     bench, allowing players to code the robot’s movement step-by-step. At the start of the
     level, the title “The Maze” will appear, and the game will end when the robot reaches
     the maze’s end and retrieves the key to escape.

  6. Other Features: The maze will dynamically interact with the robot’s movements,
     featuring obstacles, enemies, and pathways that test the player’s programming skills.




                                             6
3.2     Implementation
3.2.1   MR Interaction Setup

Through the gameplay, the player can freely interact with virtual objects within the real
escape room. There are two types of interactions: direct interaction and indirect interaction,
as depicted in Fig. 1. The former involves physically manipulating virtual objects using the
hands, while the latter utilizes eye-tracking to select objects, followed by hand gestures to
move, rotate, or scale them. Basic interactions include Picking/Transforming, Scaling, and
Rotating. MR interaction has been successfully implemented in this project using Polyspatial
and the Unity XR Interaction Toolkit.




                        (a)                                        (b)

Figure 1: Two types of interactions provided by AVP, including (a) direct interaction and (b)
indirect interaction


3.2.2   Spatial Anchoring

In this project, the Spatial Anchor serves as a key feature for persisting and stabilizing vir-
tual content within the real-world environment. For example, before the game starts, the
researcher/teacher can customize the location and rotation of the workbench, ensuring it re-
mains permanently fixed on the real escape room’s tabletop throughout the game, as depicted
in Fig. 2. The functionality for automatic loading, manual creation, and deletion of spatial
anchors to fix the position of virtual objects has been implemented in this project using AR
Foundation.

3.2.3   Hands Gesture Tracking

Hand Gesture Tracking has been implemented in this project using XR Hands. It enables the
game to continuously track the player’s hand gestures and dynamically trigger events based


                                              7
          Figure 2: The screenshot of the implemented spatial anchoring interface

on the current gesture. As shown in Fig. 3, this enables the game to simulate a real grabbing
action instead of the default pinch gesture to interact with the detector.




                  Figure 3: Example of hand gesture tracking for grabbing



4    Project Management
Fig. 4 shows the updated project timeline, with completed milestones marked in purple. All
progress has remained consistent with my previously proposed schedule. The project started
with a comprehensive literature review, covering relevant fields as summarized in Sections
1 and 2, and established clear research questions to guide the work. This foundation has
ensured a structured approach to the methodologies outlined in Section 3, including game
design, experimental planning, and implementation. Moving forward, the primary focus will
be completing the game implementation to ensure the system is ready for the following con-

                                             8
trolled experiment. The results are planned to be submitted to an education- or HCI-related
conference or journal.




                         Figure 4: Gantt chart of the project timeline



5     Reflection
Since the beginning of this semester, the majority of the early milestones were achieved as
planned, such as background research, formulation of the research questions, game design, and
design documentation.
    However, despite these positive outcomes, I encountered numerous challenges related to the
implementation, particularly with the use of AVP development tools. The greatest problem
is the instability of developing the AVP project in Unity. Given that many of the AVP
development tools and packages are still in beta, some key features, such as gesture recognition,
have been unreliable. This has resulted in prolonged testing cycles, as real-device debugging in
Unity is hindered by issues with direct deployment to the AVP, making the bug-fixing process
both time-consuming and cumbersome. Additionally, the need to use Reality Kit for AVP
rendering has created compatibility issues, as many commonly used Unity art assets are no
longer supported in the new device. As a result, additional efforts have been required to create
or source alternative visual resources for the project.
    Therefore, in response to these challenges, the timeline for future work will be adjusted to
allocate more time for the resolution of unforeseen technical issues, as well as for the preemptive
acquisition of necessary art assets.


                                                9
References
 [1] A. Veldkamp, L. van de Grint, M.-C. P. Knippels, and W. R. van Joolingen, “Escape
     education: A systematic review on escape rooms in education,” Educational Research
     Review, vol. 31, p. 100364, 2020.

 [2] S. López-Pernas, A. Gordillo, E. Barra, and J. Quemada, “Examining the use of an
     educational escape room for teaching programming in a higher education setting,” IEEE
     Access, vol. 7, pp. 31723–31737, 2019.

 [3] S. Mystakidis, G. Papantzikos, and C. Stylios, “Virtual reality escape rooms for stem
     education in industry 4.0: Greek teachers perspectives,” in 2021 6th South-East Europe
     Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer Networks and Social Media Con-
     ference (SEEDA-CECNSM), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2021.

 [4] R. Baziak, T. Daruk, K. Żyra, D. Żarek, and J. Lebiedź, “Virtual escape room in math-
     ematics,” 2024.

 [5] A. Glavaš and A. Stašcik, “Enhancing positive attitude towards mathematics through
     introducing escape room games,” Mathematics education as a science and a profession,
     vol. 281, p. 293, 2017.

 [6] A. Fuentes-Cabrera, M. E. Parra-González, J. López-Belmonte, and A. Segura-Robles,
     “Learning mathematics with emerging methodologies—the escape room as a case study,”
     Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 9, p. 1586, 2020.

 [7] H. Kaufmann, “Virtual environments for mathematics and geometry education.,” Themes
     in science and technology education, vol. 2, pp. 131–152, 2009.

 [8] Á. A. Magreñán, C. Jiménez, L. Orcos, and S. Roca, “Teaching calculus in the first year
     of an engineering degree using a digital escape room in an online scenario,” Computer
     Applications in Engineering Education, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 676–695, 2023.

 [9] G. Alonso and K. T. Schroeder, “Applying active learning in a virtual classroom such as a
     molecular biology escape room,” Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, vol. 48,
     no. 5, pp. 514–515, 2020.

[10] A. Janonis, E. Kiudys, M. Girdžiūna, T. Blažauskas, L. Paulauskas, and A. Andrejevas,
     “Escape the lab: Chemical experiments in virtual reality,” in Information and Software
     Technologies: 26th International Conference, ICIST 2020, Kaunas, Lithuania, October
     15–17, 2020, Proceedings 26, pp. 273–282, Springer, 2020.

[11] P. Fotaris and T. Mastoras, “Escape rooms for learning: A systematic review,” in Pro-
     ceedings of the European Conference on Games Based Learning, pp. 235–243, 2019.

                                              10
[12] A. Makri, D. Vlachopoulos, and R. A. Martina, “Digital escape rooms as innovative
     pedagogical tools in education: A systematic literature review,” Sustainability, vol. 13,
     no. 8, p. 4587, 2021.

[13] C. Tsalidis, A. Adjorlu, L. M. Percy-Smith, and S. Serafin, “Earscape: A vr auditory
     educational escape room,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
     Software and Technology, pp. 1–2, 2024.

[14] H. Guillen-Sanz, I. Q. Bayona, and G. L. Pérez, “Design and development of an immersive
     virtual reality serious game with biofeedback for physiological regulation: Alice, beyond
     reality,” in European Conference on Games Based Learning, vol. 18, pp. 312–319, 2024.

[15] S.-C. Chen and H. Duh, “Mixed reality in education: Recent developments and future
     trends,” in 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies
     (ICALT), pp. 367–371, IEEE, 2018.

[16] L. H. Quek, A. J. Tan, M. J. Sim, J. Ignacio, N. Harder, A. Lamb, W. L. Chua, S. T.
     Lau, and S. Y. Liaw, “Educational escape rooms for healthcare students: A systematic
     review,” Nurse education today, vol. 132, p. 106004, 2024.

[17] B. L. Morrell and H. M. Ball, “Can you escape nursing school? educational escape room
     in nursing education,” Nursing Education Perspectives, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 197–198, 2020.

[18] M. Speicher, B. D. Hall, and M. Nebeling, “What is mixed reality?,” in Proceedings of
     the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 1–15, 2019.

[19] N. Pellas, I. Kazanidis, and G. Palaigeorgiou, “A systematic literature review of mixed
     reality environments in k-12 education,” Education and Information Technologies, vol. 25,
     no. 4, pp. 2481–2520, 2020.

[20] A. Banjar, X. Xu, M. Z. Iqbal, and A. Campbell, “A systematic review of the experimental
     studies on the effectiveness of mixed reality in higher education between 2017 and 2021,”
     Computers & Education: X Reality, vol. 3, p. 100034, 2023.

[21] Nuclio, “Game design document template and examples.” https://www.nuclino.com/
     articles/game-design-document-template, 2023. Accessed: 06 Dec 2023.




                                             11
A     Appendices
A.1    Project Design Document




                                          (a)




                      (b)                                     (c)

Figure 5: The PDD template, including (a) project concept (b) project timeline, (c) and
project sketch.

                                          12
