        Project Proposal: Evaluating the Impact of
         Phobia Motivated Experiences delivered
              through a Virtual Environment
                        Denis Stepanov
                          20027064
                    scyds1@nottingham.edu.cn
                   Supervised by Dr Dave Towey
         School of Computer Science University of Nottingham Ningbo China
                             1
               Background and Motivation
               Since the release of the ﬁrst virtual reality headsets in 1960s, VR technology has been
               evolving and progressing all over the world [1]. Now, there are more aﬀordable headsets,
               such as Google Daydream, Oculus Go and others on the market which interest many re-
               searchers, especially in the healthcare industry [2]. Considering that ﬁrst VR interactions
               were introduced more than 50 years ago, there is still a lot of potential to grow in the
               terms of helping patients and doctors in the ﬁeld. VR systems and Virtual Reality Envi-
               ronments (VRE) are becoming more common in the healthcare applications for training
               professionals, educating the staﬀ and treating patients [3].
               Distinctive changes in the healthcare over the world signiﬁcantly aﬀected on the education
               of healthcare professionals.  Recent studies show that on average they take up to 30
               years in the ﬁeld of study to achieve the position in medical treatment [2]. However,
               the advances in the technology oﬀers new innovative tools and makes it more reliable
               when it comes to the education in the healthcare. Virtual reality is now used in various
               ﬁelds of medical treatment, including professional education/training, surgery training
               and diagnostic assistance for health staﬀ [4]. It is also used for patients in rehabilitation
               and various mental treatments.
               Anatomyhasbeenalwaysoneofthemostsigniﬁcantaspectsinthehealthcare[5]. For the
               past 5 years, almost 90% of the applications on VR were made to simulate surgery, treating
               patients mental activity and precisely diagnosing various mental diseases [6]. However,
               there are still not many applications that are present on the market that actually help
               to analyze the problem and the diseases. The study of brain activity has been one of
               the biggest interests in the VR healthcare industry for past 10 years [5]. Almost all of
               the brain activity research in VR is concentrated on human feelings that can be achieved
               virtually, such as fear or stress. Considering recent studies, it is conﬁrmed that more than
               90%ofpeople have various phobias, and it is important to know how to analyze and treat
               them [5].
               Searching through the VR healthcare applications that are on the market now, we can
               conclude that there are not many products available which address phobia motivated ex-
               periences. Limbix VR library shows that it is very important for the patient to completely
               immerse in the situation of fear and try to present it as real as possible [7]. There are
               several applications, such as Limbix [7] and C2phobia [8], which provide the necessary
               experiences, but none of them collect any personal data to evaluate the impact of virtual
               phobia environment. The problem behind virtual phobias is the lack of proper system
               which would help healthcare professionals to analyze the world of phobias and to assist
               their patients according to the proper diagnoses.
               Unfortunately, the applications like Limbix[7] and C2Care[8] do not evaluate the impact
               of phobias motivated experiences. As it was mentioned before, they do not collect any
               personal data from the patients and only provide virtual reality environments. However,
               there are products on the market that are serving speciﬁcally for the purpose of data
               collection. Qardio [9] is the arm monitor which provides all of the necessary details
               for the users about their health, such as heart rate, blood pressure and others. It is
               an example of wearable technology connected with phone application to display data.
               However, Qardio only functions as a standalone measurement tool and does not include
               any VR environment to be tested with. Therefore, it is worth to investigate wearable
               technology combined with virtual reality environments as the way to evaluate the impact
               of phobia motivated experiences.
                                                           2
        Aims and Objectives
        Themainobjectiveofthis project is to create a system capable of providing virtual reality
        environment for the user with phobia(s) and deliver the patient’s data to the healthcare
        professional using wearable technology. The system would also come with necessary hard-
        ware and software tools to help evaluate the impact of user’s phobia motivated experience.
        The key objectives of this research are:
          1. Investigate previous and current methods that are used to treat patients with pho-
            bia(s).
          2. Design a comprehensive system of cooperating hardware and software tools to dis-
            play virtual reality environment addressing phobia(s).
          3. Develop an Android application communicating with wearable technology which
            would send and display the patient’s information to the healthcare professionals.
          4. Test, collect data and analyze the results that the application provides to evaluate
            the impact of phobia motivated experiences.
        Project Plan
        Project development starts with collecting necessary hardware and software tools. Then,
        it leads to the implementation of VR application to display phobia(s) and Android appli-
        cation to collect data. The development of the applications will take the most signiﬁcant
        part of the project because it requires most of the code writing. Testing and data ana-
        lyzing with corresponding ethics approvals would also take a signiﬁcant part of project
        development time considering the Ethics Committee approval time estimates.
        TheGanntchartbelowdescribestheprojectplan. Using Waterfall methodology, I plan to
        conclude testing on each major stage of software implementation. Some of the tasks can be
        combined due to the importance levels, risk management and wait time for other various
        tasks that do no depend on the developer, such as ethics forms approval. Moreover, the
        spread of the workload is laid more on the ﬁrst half of the year because of the amount of
        credits put in each semester. Considering that the fall semester takes less time for classes,
        I plan to ﬁnish the implementation of required software before the end of Spring Festival.
          A. Write and submit the proposal
          B. Prepare and submit necessary ethics forms
          C. Gather necessary literature and research phobia examples
          D. Collect all of hardware and software required for the project completion
          E. Develop the VR application displaying various phobia motivated experiences
          F. Test the environments
          G. Write the Interim Report (deadline 16th Decemeber, 2019, 16:00)
                                  3
       H. Gather software feedback and update the system according to the requirements
        I. Decrease weekly set time for the project due to exam preparations
        J. Update the market research and available VR systems
       K. Implement the Android application to collect data from the patient using wearable
         technology
        L. Get ethical approvals for ﬁnal evaluations
       M. Start full system testing and data collection
       N. Conclude the research and provide outcome analysis
       O. Finish Dissertation (deadline 20th April, 2020, 16:00)
                         4
                  References
                  [1]   P. Cipresso, I. A. C. Giglioli, M. A. Raya, and G. Riva, “The past, present, and
                        future of virtual and augmented reality research: A network and cluster analysis of the
                        literature,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 9, Jun. 2018. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02086.
                  [2]   F. Mantovani, G. Castelnuovo, A. Gaggioli, and G. Riva, “Virtual reality training for
                        health-care professionals,” CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 389–395,
                        2003. doi: 10.1089/109493103322278772.
                  [3]   A. S. Pillai and P. S. Mathew, “Impact of virtual reality in healthcare,” Advances in
                        Psychology, Mental Health, and Behavioral Studies Virtual and Augmented Reality
                        in Mental Health Treatment, pp. 17–31, doi: 10.4018/978-1-5225-7168-1.ch002.
                  [4]   N.Ichalkaranje and A. Ichalkaranje, Intelligent paradigms for assistive and preventive
                        healthcare. Springer, 2011.
                  [5]   K. Srivastava, S. Chaudhury, and R. Das, “Virtual reality applications in mental
                        health: Challenges and perspectives,” Industrial Psychiatry Journal, vol. 23, no. 2,
                        p. 83, 2014. doi: 10.4103/0972-6748.151666.
                  [6]   C. S. L´anyi, “Virtual reality in healthcare,” Intelligent Paradigms for Assistive and
                        Preventive Healthcare Studies in Computational Intelligence, pp. 87–116, doi: 10.
                        1007/11418337 3.
                  [7]   Limbix, About Limbix, https://www.limbix.com/about, [Online; accessed 24-
                        October-2019].
                  [8]   Rus-Calafell, C2Phobia - Treating phobias in virtual reality, https://www.c2.care/en/
                        c2phobia-treating-phobias-in-virtual-reality/, [Online; accessed 24-October-2019].
                  [9]   Qardio, About Us, https://www.getqardio.com/about-us/, [Online; accessed 24-
                        October-2019].
                                                                        5
