                    Project Proposal:
           Enhancing Financial Fraud Detection
          through Reinforcement Learning-based
                      Oversampling
                   Patience Chew Yee CHEAH
                          20314828
                    scypc3@nottingham.edu.cn
                  Supervised by Dr Boon Giin LEE
            School of Computer Science University of Nottingham Ningbo China
              Background and Motivation
              Due to the prevalence of digital payment and e-commerce, the rise in financial fraud
              has become a concerning issue. Hence, studies adopted numerous machine learning algo-
              rithms, including Random Forest, XGBoost, LightGBM, Feed-forward Neural Networks,
              and Convolutional Neural Networks, to detect finance frauds automatically [1]. A recent
              study [2] employed Reinforcement Learning (RL), an algorithm with an agent that tries
              to maximize its cumulative reward when making sequences of decisions [3], to identify
              finance fraud records, which outperformed most machine learning models.
              The extreme class imbalance issue is a significant challenge faced by traditional machine
              learning classifiers due to the skewed distribution of finance fraud datasets. Usually, the
              number of fraud, or minority, samples is significantly lower than the legitimate ones. As
              a result, the diagnosis models tend to favor the majority class, or the nonfraud class,
              causing high false-positive rates [4].
              Numerousoversampling methods were proposed to increase the minority class representa-
              tion by duplicating the minority samples or generating new ones. The Synthetic Minority
              Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) [5] and its variations are the standard approaches
              for class imbalance handling at the data level [6].  Generative Adversarial Networks
              (GAN) [7] has also shown promising performance in generating minority samples in fi-
              nance fraud datasets [8]. To overcome the weak points of individual SMOTE and GAN,
              the SMOTified-GAN [9], a hybrid method, was proposed.
              However, traditional oversampling techniques, which purely focus on the dataset dis-
              tribution, can sometimes overfit the classifiers. Hence, studies have proposed methods
              considering the classifiers’ performance when generating minority samples. A study [10]
              adopted RL to synthesize minority samples directly based on the classifier’s performance.
              AESMOTE [11] employs RL to select training samples to train an RL diagnosis model
              from an augmented dataset that contains original and SMOTE-generated minority sam-
              ples. The reward obtained by the RL agent depends on the diagnosis model’s classification
              performance. Similarly, the DiagSelect [12] framework adopts RL to pick a suitable subset
              of training samples to train machine learning classifiers.
              While the RL oversampling methods demonstrated improvements from the traditional
              methods, either through generating minority samples or selecting training samples, their
              resulting F1-scores usually did not exceed 0.9 [10, 11, 12]. Therefore, it is worth redesign-
              ing the RL oversampling algorithm to optimize the generated minority samples to improve
              the classifiers’ final performances.
                                                        1
       Aims and Objectives
       This project aims to tackle the class imbalance problem in the finance fraud dataset using
       a RL-based oversampling technique to improve the classification performance of machine
       learning models. The technique can optimize the generated samples by maximizing a re-
       wardwhichisdefinedbasedontheclassifier’sperformancewhentrainedontheaugmented
       dataset. To achieve this aim, the objectives are:
        1. To review the oversampling methods for class imbalance handling, including the
          utilization of RL in tackling this issue.
        2. To investigate the performances of existing machine learning classifiers on finance
          fraud or anomaly detection.
        3. To design an oversampling method using RL to generate high-quality samples or
          select suitable samples to improve the performance of the classifiers.
        4. ToevaluatetheproposedRL-basedoversamplingmethodondifferentmachinelearn-
          ing classifiers.
                           2
       Project Plan
       To accomplish the objectives of this project, milestones have been identified with appro-
       priate time-frames, showing in Table 3.1. The first month will be spent on preliminary
       work and literature review. During this period, state-of-the-art fraud detection methods
       and oversampling techniques will be reviewed. Since this project adopts RL and machine
       learning, these two techniques will also be studied.
       After conducting background studies, an RL-based oversampling method will be designed,
       implemented, and tested. The remainder of the autumn semester will focus on completing
       the interim report.
       The first half of the spring semester primarily focuses on modifying and improving the
       initial design. The ultimate findings will be written either in a journal or a conference
       paper. Since writings take time, a three-month time-frame is allotted to complete the
       writing tasks.
                 Figure 3.1: Project Milestones and Time Plan
                            3
       References
        [1] X. Zhu, X. Ao, Z. Qin, Y. Chang, Y. Liu, Q. He, and J. Li, “Intelligent financial fraud
         detection practices in post-pandemic era,” The Innovation, vol. 2, no. 4, p. 100176,
         2021.
        [2] S. Vimal, K. Kayathwal, H. Wadhwa, and G. Dhama, “Application of deep reinforce-
         ment learning to payment fraud,” 2021.
        [3] F. AlMahamid and K. Grolinger, “Reinforcement learning algorithms: An overview
         and classification,” in 2021 IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer
         Engineering (CCECE), pp. 1–7, 2021.
        [4] B. Krawczyk, “Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges and future direc-
         tions,” Progress in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, pp. 221–232, 2016.
        [5] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer, “SMOTE: Synthetic
         minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Int. Res., vol. 16, p. 321–357, Jun 2002.
        [6] A. Fern´andez, S. Garc´ıa, F. Herrera, and N. V. Chawla, “SMOTE for learning from
         imbalanceddata: Progressandchallenges, markingthe15-yearanniversary,” J. Artif.
         Int. Res., vol. 61, p. 863–905, jan 2018.
        [7] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair,
         A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proceedings of the
         27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume
         2, NIPS’14, (Cambridge, MA, USA), p. 2672–2680, MIT Press, 2014.
        [8] U. Fiore, A. De Santis, F. Perla, P. Zanetti, and F. Palmieri, “Using generative
         adversarial networks for improving classification effectiveness in credit card fraud
         detection,” Information Sciences, vol. 479, pp. 448–455, 2019.
        [9] A. Sharma, P. K. Singh, and R. Chandra, “SMOTified-GAN for class imbalanced
         pattern classification problems,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 30655–30665, 2022.
       [10] Y. Zhou, J. Shu, X. Zhong, X. Huang, C. Luo, and J. Ai, “Oversampling algorithm
         based on reinforcement learning in imbalanced problems,” in GLOBECOM 2020 -
         2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pp. 01–06, 2020.
       [11] X. Ma and W. Shi, “AESMOTE: Adversarial reinforcement learning with SMOTE
         for anomaly detection,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering,
         vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 943–956, 2021.
       [12] S. Fan, X. Zhang, and Z. Song, “Imbalanced sample selection with deep reinforcement
         learning for fault diagnosis,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18,
         no. 4, pp. 2518–2527, 2022.
                            4
